The Galactic Empire, also known as the First Galactic Empire, the Imperial regime, Palpatine's regime, or simply the Empire, and later as the Old Empire, was a fascist and imperialist dictatorship that replaced the Galactic Republic at the end of the Clone Wars.
Though the Empire rose to power by promising to bring order to the galaxy, it oversaw a period of military rule and aggressive expansion.
The subsequent Imperial Era would last only two decades, for it was eventually overthrown by the Alliance to Restore the Republic in the Galactic Civil War, but not before the sovereign star systems of the galaxy's known regions had been largely conquered by the Empire's forces.

The Empire traced its origins to a Sith conspiracy to destroy the Jedi Order and regain control over the galaxy.
The Empire was secretly controlled by the Sith, for the Galactic Emperor was, in fact, the Sith Lord Darth Sidious, whose reign was enforced by his apprentice, Darth Vader, whom he eventually elevated to the position of supreme commander of the Imperial fleet.
Rising to power on a groundswell of populist support and capitalizing on anti-Jedi and anti-droid sentiment and human-ethnocentrism manufactured by the destructive Clone Wars, Darth Sidious appointed himself Emperor at the end of the conflict by promising security and stability to the war-torn Republic.
Gaining the overwhelming approval of the Galactic Senate, Darth Sidious staged a coup by the Jedi and oversaw their subsequent purge from the galaxy, assisted by his right-hand, Darth Vader.

The Empire stood virtually unchallenged during its rise to power, with the backing of the Imperial Senate and the spreading of its massive technological military force across the galaxy and began a major expansion and encroaching into the unexplored regions.
At first, the Galactic Empire was a constitutional monarchy in basic theory, however it gradually evolved into a stratocracy as the power of the Imperial Senate waned.
However, numerous insurgent cells sprang up against the Empire and gradually united to initiate a growing rebellion, winning its first major victory over Mustafar in 4 BBY.
These rebel groups eventually formed the Rebel Alliance in 2 BBY, and achieved its first major victory with the theft of the Death Star plans on Scarif, which, in turn, led to the destruction of the Death Star at the Battle of Yavin.
The following years saw initial Alliance successes until a major Imperial victory on Hoth in 3 ABY, but the Empire suffered a devastating defeat one year later at the Battle of Endor.
During the battle, Darth Sidious was slain at the hands of his former disciple, the redeemed Anakin Skywalker, who himself died shortly thereafter, marking the end of Sith rule and the deterioration of the Empire and the resumption of the Galactic Republic, the New Republic.

With the deaths of the Emperor and his top lieutenant, factionalism overcame the Empire as it fractured into breakaway fiefdoms led by splinter Moffs, admirals, and generals, many of whom ignored Grand Vizier Mas Amedda's authority at the capital and became warlords as the Empire continued to fight the Republic.
The Imperial Navy came to be publicly led by loyalist Grand Admiral Rae Sloane, though she was a figurehead for Fleet Admiral Gallius Rax.
Ultimately, Rax seized control over the loyalist forces, removing Sloane from power and becoming Emperor-in-effect through his new position as Counselor to the Empire.
Under Rax's command, the Empire made its final stand at the Battle of Jakku in 5 ABY, ultimately losing and capitulating to the New Republic.
With the cessation of the fighting, the Galactic Concordance was signed, vanquishing the Empire.

While the Empire was gone, its replacement of the New Republic faced continued resistance from several Imperial holdouts in the years after.
Meanwhile the First Order, a military organization dedicated to rebuilding the Empire, began a clandestine armament program.
They were unaware, however, that they had been manipulated by a new hidden conspiracy, for secret cultists on the lost world of Exegol attended to the spirit of Darth Sidious, and constructed a fleet built to herald a new Sith Empire.
The cult efforts ultimately failed, however, for they were opposed by the Resistance and Jedi Order, leading to an end of the First Order.