Jabba Desilijic Tiure, more commonly referred to as Jabba the Hutt or simply Jabba, and formally styled as His Excellency Jabba Desilijic Tiure of Nal Hutta, Eminence of Tatooine, was a Hutt male gangster and crime lord, as well as a leading member of the Grand Hutt Council and influential leader of the Hutt Clan, who operated and led a criminal empire from his palace on the Outer Rim world of Tatooine.
Jabba was a major figure on Tatooine, where he controlled the bulk of the piracy, slavery, and trafficking in illegal goods that generated most of the planet's wealth.
He was also highly influential in the entire Outer Rim as one of its most powerful crime lords.

During the Clone Wars, Jabba's influence and power over the Outer Rim, specifically its hyperlanes, was sought by both the Galactic Republic and the Confederacy of Independent Systems, who both courted Jabba's approval.
When Rotta, Jabba's son, was kidnapped, the crime lord promised his support to whoever returned his son.
When the Separatists were revealed to have orchestrated Rotta's kidnapping, Jabba pledged his support to the Republic.

Jabba continued to operate in the Outer Rim after the end of the Clone Wars and the rise of the Galactic Empire, preserving his power base, despite the interference of Darth Sidious, the Galactic Emperor.
After the destruction of the Death Star by the Rebel Alliance, the Emperor sent Darth Vader to negotiate a deal with Jabba to secure raw materials for Imperial military production.
Jabba's alliance with the Empire allowed him and the Hutts to resist the Imperial crackdown against criminal elements in the Outer Rim, as well as rid the Hutt of his competitors.

After the smuggler Han Solo failed to repay him for lost cargo, Jabba placed a high price on his head.
Solo was eventually delivered to him by one of his bounty hunters, Boba Fett, as a gift from Darth Vader.
However, this capture brought him to the attention of Jedi Knight Luke Skywalker, who sought to rescue his friend from Jabba's imprisonment.
As he attempted to execute the Jedi and his allies in the Great Pit of Carkoon, Jabba was choked to death by Leia Organa.
With the Hutts unable to decide who would inherit Jabba's criminal ventures, many of his slaves, including the Niktos, were free, and his palace was occupied by his former Majordomo Bib Fortuna, who took his place as Daimyo of Tatooine until Fett killed and usurped him.
Fett sought to rebuild Jabba's criminal empire in his own image, intending to rule with respect rather than the fear that the Hutt instilled in his followers.